Brown was talking about all the get your
bike set up and so forth but they're one
of the major things also is getting your
clickers right that's one things I have
notice is you're seeing a lot of the
guys logo and pack in and some of the
guys really don't know kind of what I'm
talking about
a lot of times I know what my bike is
set up properly but I really don't know
how to get there can you explain to them
a little bit more how to get your bike
set up a little bit we're gonna stop
acting okay and exactly what they do how
far to turn them what clicker solves
what problem okay
now I'm going to start out by telling
you there is no magic carpet ride
suspension they've been working on it
for years but it's still not here yet
but you really can't get a good
middle-of-the-road setup and when we do
suspension here at SMS that's what we
try to give people we know that in Toro
you'll go to Bonita
which is one extreme you've got high
speed you've got deep sand you've got
big jumps and then you've got another
extreme like going to Oklahoma when you
get up there and you get in the tight
stuff and you get in the rocks and you
got lots of low speed sharp hits so
you've got to have a suspension that's
versatile but to get when you actually
get to these places you actually need to
tune your suspension so that it was
worth there now you've got to think
about when you're when you're writing
then place your riding ask for the
obstacle you're having trouble with you
need to figure out whether this is a
low-speed hit or a high-speed hit now
when we say low speed in high speed in
the suspension world has nothing to do
with mile-per-hour it has to do with
shaft speed it has to do with actually
how fast or slow this is
actually compresses okay now rocks ruse
braking bumps acceleration bumps which
we ride in a lot of and a natural
terrain off-road circuit is a high-speed
hit the suspicion must move very quickly
to absorb an impact that is small like
that and typically there's many of those
in a row at the same time whenever you
get into those high-speed bits when you
get to a place like Bonita those jump
landings at big rolling whoops and gos
even though you're going a lot faster
those are low speed hits the suspension
does not move very quickly in those
instances okay so once you determine
high speed or low speed problem then you
can start to tune your suspensions okay
now we're gonna go through what bikes
have four clickers for starters now on
the front end typically there's only two
adjustments some bikes have three okay
on xcw KTMs and edx seeking some spikes
like that the compressions on the bottom
and the rebounds on top all JAF modern
Japanese bikes and the KTM xcs NSX is
it's reversed the compressions on top
rebounds on bottom if you don't know
which one your bike is you can call us
where you can look at your owner's mate
now compression controls this is an x
ews are compressions on the box but
compression controls how fast it goes
how fast it compresses
when you hit a bump rebound controls how
fast it comes back out okay I hear a lot
of people talk about their front end is
pogoing okay they always think they need
to slow their rebound down when it's
pogoing but the reality is is it's
typically a compression problem step
around here I'm going to show you on
this motorcycle real quick when you
compress the front end on a motorcycle
it does not trying to jump back up so
fast that when you're going through
bumps at speed that it would push you
back up the springs just aren't that
stiff when you're getting a pogoing
thick you're not actually getting a
problem with the best of rebound damping
the problem typically is as your
compression is either too soft or too
stiff it can actually be either one with
most modern motocross bikes the
compression is typically too stiff and
it's not actually soaking all those
little bumps up so it's giving you a
jarring feeling to your hands because
it's actually not absorbing okay you can
also get the pogo in the thick bite your
compression being too soft and it's
actually using too much travel and then
having to come back up too far and too
much travel again but both ways you saw
that if you look the compression clicker
easiest way to figure out which problem
you have is have someone watch you and
if it's using a ton of suspension travel
then you need to stiffen your
compression okay when I went to race
tech school Paul Feig who is a very
smart individual on race day
he actually took us out to the racetrack
and proved to us that it's almost
impossible to have to fast to rebound
okay very fast rebound on your Forks
equals
compression our good traction excuse me
the faster your rebound is the more your
front tire stays planted and follows the
ground so your tires have good traction
okay now you can get to the point where
you have no control over the front ends
you do have to have some amount of
rebound damping on the front but like I
said the rebound clicker is very
confusing most people grab it for the
wrong reasons
try to tune your problems with your
compression clicker on the front when we
get to the rear it's the same way let's
come back around to this motorcycle you
have compression and rebound again now
all modern motorcycles compression is a
top rebound is on the bottom most modern
bikes have a high and low speed
compression adjuster the high speed is
the dial on these K teams it's a 17
millimeter and the low speed is the
brass Center screw we talked about
Vanita we talked about Oklahoma if
you're at Oklahoma and the rear end
skipping around beat you up those are
high speed hits you would want to back
your high speed dial off okay clock wise
on all modern clickers makes things
stiffer stiffer actually is slower so it
moves through the travel slower
counterclockwise is softer which
actually means faster they almost have
changed the little things from soft and
hard to slow and fast it would make more
sense to people anyway at a place like
Vinita if you're bottoming out on jump
landings or big loops you would want to
crank in your low speed compression
adjuster which is the center clicker
we're gonna talk about rebound on modern
bikes as well it's just like the front
end most people reach for the rebound
clicker for the wrong reasons
the most common suspension complaint
there is is my rear end is kicking okay
now at the same time when I went to race
tech school won't they prove to us that
you fixed that ninety percent of the
time with the compression clicker as
well okay
majority of kicking is caused from
what's called deflection okay deflection
is your rear suspension doesn't actually
soak up the hit say you're running along
third fourth year speed and you hit a
square inch curved shaped object or rock
or root it's very difficult for your
suspension to move fast enough to soak
that impact up typically what happens is
the rear end kicks up okay
people think wow my rear end kicked I
need to slow my rebound down well if
your suspension never actually soaked it
up how slow and your rebound down gonna
affect the way to cure a deflection is
to soften your compressions so the shock
has a better chance to soak that impact
up there comes a point to where hitting
a curve shaped object there's a certain
speed that no matter how soft you soft
your stuff up it won't be able to absorb
it it's just physically impossible if
you did set something up to soak up a
curve at say 60 70 miles an hour then
the suspension would be terrible
everywhere else so you can only tune to
a certain point but if it's kicking you
the first thing you should try is
actually softening from your compression
okay second most common complaint I get
about suspension is swapping through
or bouncing sideways when you land off a
jump that's still a swamp that's caused
people also want to reap reach through
the rebound clicker and slow it down for
that but that's also not the solution
okay when you get a swab or a sideways
bounce off the jump landing it's the
exact opposite of deflection you
actually have bottom of your suspension
used all your travel that energy has to
go somewhere so a whole motorcycle will
hop sideways or bounce up and swing
sideways when that happens you actually
need to stiffen your compression clicker
so that it doesn't use all of its
travels so fast
and doesn't have so much energy and is
needs to dissipate when it bottoms hard
ok so 90 percent of your suspension
issues can be solved with your
compression clickers both front and rear
always reach for them first because the
rebound adjuster a lot of times when you
go to it it may make your system will
symptom a little better but more than
likely it's going to be a trade-off
somewhere else and make something else
worse so try to two-week your
compression click